Document releases flow (#1789)
microsoft/react-native-macos: docs/Releases.md

- Extract all the steps to a template `apple-job-publish` with a parameter to switch between nightlies, dry runs, and releases. This was we can now add a new "NPM Publish Dry Run" step to our PR checks.

The new publish yaml looks like this:

1. Setup our pipeline with NPM / Github auth tokens (extracted into the template `apple-release-setup`)
2. Call the template `apple-job-publish` with either nightly or release as the build type based on branch name. 
3. The template will do the following steps based on build type:
    - If we're a *nightly* or *dry run*
      - Just call `publish-npm.js`, as this will take care of bumping versions, and publishing and no pushing back to Github is needed
    - If we're a release:
      1. Autogenerate the next version number and set to an environment variable (this logic was extracted from bumpFileVersions in 0.68)
      2. Set the `latest` tag to an environment variable. This will be passed to..
      3. Call `prepare-package-for-release` to bump versions, tag the commit, and push to git
      4. Call `publish-npm` to publish to NPM the version that was just tagged. 

> 

Author: Add step 4 where we actually git push and publish / npm publish

# Releases Guide

We use Azure Pipelines for our publish pipeline. The pipeline is defined in `.ado/publish.yml`, and is set to run on pushes to `main` and `*-stable` branches. The pipeline steps differ between stable branches, with the latest as of time of writing (`0.71-stable`) attempting to re-use some of the NodeJS scripts used by our upstream repo React Native in their CircleCI pipeline. 

## Relevant Scripts from React Native Core

There are various nodejs scripts that React Native Core uses to maintain their releases. These have been refactored over time, so I'll be brief and mention the relevant scripts for React Native macOS. For more info on upstream releases, you can take a look at https://reactnative.dev/contributing/release-testing

> - set-rn-version.js : This will modify file version numbers, (optionally) commit the version bump, and delete "private" and "workspace" keys from the root package.json to make it suitable for publishing. Most of the other scripts below call this script.

Reviewer: I don't think it does the `private` and `workspace` stuff after the monorepo work since we created a `packages/react-native/package.json`

> - set-rn-version.js : This will modify file version numbers, (optionally) commit the version bump, and delete "private" and "workspace" keys from the root package.json to make it suitable for publishing. Most of the other scripts below call this script.

Reviewer: `set-rn-version` shouldn't commit anything. It just locally modifies the files. `prepare-package-for-release` (which calls `set-rn-version` when we're publishing a stable/patch) does.

> - set-rn-version.js : This will modify file version numbers, (optionally) commit the version bump, and delete "private" and "workspace" keys from the root package.json to make it suitable for publishing. Most of the other scripts below call this script.

Author: 1) It seems you are correct, `set-rn-version` doesn't delete keys in the latest version. We aren't synced to paste monorepo work just yet, so I will probably leave a note to say this changes for 0.72+.

2) We had local modifications that _did_ commit things inside `set-rn-version`. That was part of the reason I wanted to refactor React Native macOS's publish, we seemed to be differing a lot and the purpose of files changed. 
https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-macos/blob/4696d347c9cf9110a7ded81a9db7b1b3f35b3b52/scripts/set-rn-version.js#L276-L309

> - set-rn-version.js : This will modify file version numbers, (optionally) commit the version bump, and delete "private" and "workspace" keys from the root package.json to make it suitable for publishing. Most of the other scripts below call this script.

Author: I've updated the doc to clarify that `set-rn-version.js` only locally bumps file versions. I moved the bit about modifications down to the "How React native macOS publish pipeline works, 0.68 and lower" section.

- bump-oss-version.js : This is an interactive script used by Open Source maintainers to push React Native releases. It will walk you through the steps of trigerring a new release, which includes triggering some CircleCI jobs to publish to NPM.
prepare-package-for-release.js: This is used by CircleCI. It will call `set-rn-version`, update the podfile.lock, and appropriately `git tag` the release with the version and/or the "latest" tag. It will also `git push` the version bump and tags back to Github. 
- publish-npm.js: This is used by CircleCI, and is generally triggered by a new git tag. This script takes care of the actual `npm publish`, along with creating and publishing Android artifacts. 
  - For nightlies and dry-runs, it will call `set-rn-version` to bump versions in the repo.
  - For releases (pre-release and stable), it is expected that CircleCI already ran `prepare-package-for-release.js` in an earlier job to bump versions. I think

## How our Publish pipeline works

### 0.68 and earlier

Our publish pipeline was mostly separate from React Native Core. At this point in time, we only re-used `set-rn-version.js`, with heavy modifications to:

> 1. An extra arguments to handle nightlies, 

Author: I believe it was `--rnm-publish` and `--nightly` (We had extra logic to publish nightlies before upstream did here I believe). I can update this file with that extra info.

> 1. An extra arguments to handle nightlies, 

Reviewer 2: yeah better to be clear.

2. Not destructively delete `private` / `workspace` keys from the package.json file (we have separate steps to delete and restore those keys in our pipeline)
3. Make it more similar to `bump-oss-version.js` (I guess the intention was to make it the one script to call that is more CI friendly?)
4. .. but also skip some of those modifications with an extra `rnmpublish` flag because we do `git tag` and `git push separately? I suspect merges made the history here a little weird 😅

Our publish yaml will mostly do:

1. Set tags for NPM based on the branch
2. Conditional based on branch:
    - If we're on the *main* branch
      - Call `set-rn-version` with the extra nightly / rnm-publish args
    - If we're on a *stable* branch
      - Call our own script `bumpFileVersions` to auto-bump versions in files, calling `set-rn-version`
4. Remove `workspace` / `private` keys from package.json manually 
5. Publish to NPM
6. Restore `workspace` / `private` keys from package.json manually 
7. `gitTagRelease.js` to push the tags and new version bump back to git.

> ### 0.71+

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### 0.71 and higher
```

An attempt was made to simplify the steps above and re-use more of the scripts that React Native Core uses. Namely:
- Use more of the RN scripts to handle things like git tagging, git pushing, and NPM publishing. The intention is to leverage new features that have been added to those scripts, like the ability to build nightlies and dry runs, along with increased safety via checks on the version number. 
- Don't bother with manually removing and restoring workspace config. We don't need the `private` field set anyway since we don't have beachball auto-publishing or anything. 
- Extract all the steps to a template `apple-job-publish` with a parameter to switch between nightlies, dry runs, and releases. This was we can now add a new "NPM Publish Dry Run" step to our PR checks.

We don't however, use the scripts from upstream to publish to NPM or Github, we still keep that as separate steps in Azure Pipelines. In the future, we can look into removing these steps and just using the scripts directly. 

> The new publish yaml looks like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Publish flow does the following:
```

1. Setup our pipeline with NPM / Github auth tokens (extracted into the template `apple-release-setup`)
2. Call the template `apple-job-publish` with either nightly or release as the build type based on branch name. 
3. The template will do the following steps based on build type:
    - If we're a *nightly* or *dry run*
      - Just call `publish-npm.js`, as this will take care of bumping versions, and publishing and no pushing back to Github is needed
    - If we're a release:

>       1. Autogenerate the next version number and set to an environment variable (this logic was extracted from bumpFileVersions in 0.68)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      1. Autogenerate the next version number and set to an environment variable (this logic was extracted from `bumpFileVersions` in 0.68)
```

>       2. Set the `latest` tag to an environment variable. This will be passed to..

Author: There's a `latestStableBranch` variable in the YML we can update.

>       2. Set the `latest` tag to an environment variable. This will be passed to..

Author: https://github.com/microsoft/react-native-macos/blob/3ea16bd3045d4c6a49eb7dcdb0b85eb7115a9daf/.ado/variables/vars.yml#L5

We should probably document it as "This is something to update when we release a new version". I'm also open to a better idea of how to tag latest.

>       2. Set the `latest` tag to an environment variable. This will be passed to..

Author: ... looking at the tags, it seems that `0.68.70` did get tagged as latest. I may need to update the yml in the `0.68-stable` branch to fix that. I should also delete the `vtest-npm` and `vtest-npm-71` tags as I didn't expect them to stick around that long :( 

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6722175/233196744-c91462b7-4334-4898-a4a5-f8e878a94445.png)

# Releases Guide

> React Native macOS has 3 types of builds it will publish. that are shared with React Native

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
React Native macOS has 3 types of builds it can publish, similarly to core:
```

> 1. **Dry Runs** : Only used by CI to test a PR won't break our publish flow
> 2. **Nightlies / Canaries** : Published off our main branch with every commit
> 3. **Stable Releases** : Published off `*-stable` branches, with a new patch release for every commit.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. **Dry Runs** : Only used by CI to test a PR won't break our publish flow
2. **Nightlies / Canaries** : Published off our main branch on every commit
3. **Stable Releases** : Published off `*-stable` branches, with a new patch release for every commit
```

> We use Azure Pipelines for our publish pipeline. The pipeline is defined in `.ado/publish.yml`, and is set to run on pushes to `main` and `*-stable` branches. The pipeline steps differ between stable branches, with the latest as of time of writing (`0.71-stable`) attempting to re-use some of the NodeJS scripts used by our upstream repo React Native in their CircleCI pipeline. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We use Azure Pipelines for our publish pipeline. The pipeline is defined in `.ado/publish.yml`, and is set to run on pushes to `main` and `*-stable` branches. The pipeline steps differ between stable branches, with the latest as of time of writing (`0.71-stable`) attempting to re-use some of the scripts used by the upstream repo in their CircleCI pipelines. 
```

## Relevant Scripts from React Native Core

> There are various nodejs scripts that React Native Core uses to maintain their releases. These have been refactored over time, so I'll be brief and mention the relevant scripts for React Native macOS. For more info on upstream releases, you can take a look at https://reactnative.dev/contributing/release-testing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There are various scripts that React Native core uses to manage their releases. These have been refactored over time, so I'll be brief and mention the relevant scripts for React Native macOS. For more info on upstream releases, you can take a look at [the documentation](https://reactnative.dev/contributing/release-branch-cut-and-rc0)
```

Author: I'm wondering if we should not use the wording "React Native Core" from public messaging. I think only Microsoft folks call it that to distinguish it from React Native macOS / React Native Windows.

- `set-rn-version.js` : This will locally modify file version numbers. Most other scripts below call this script. Depending on the repo and branch, this script was modified to do a lot more, including:

>   - (React Native 0.72 and lower) Delete the "private" and "workspace" keys from the root package.json to make it suitable for publishing. In React Native macOS, we commented this out.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  - (React Native 0.71 and lower) Delete the "private" and "workspace" keys from the root package.json to make it suitable for publishing. In React Native macOS, we commented this out.
```

The Publish flow does the following:

1. Set tags for NPM based on the branch
2. Conditional based on branch:
    - If we're on the *main* branch
      - Call `set-rn-version` with the extra nightly / rnm-publish args
    - If we're on a *stable* branch
      - Call our own script `bumpFileVersions` to auto-bump versions in files, calling `set-rn-version`
4. Remove `workspace` / `private` keys from package.json manually 
5. Publish to NPM
6. Restore `workspace` / `private` keys from package.json manually 
7. `gitTagRelease.js` to push the tags and new version bump back to git.

### 0.71 and higher

An attempt was made to simplify the steps above and re-use more of the scripts that React Native Core uses. Namely:
- Use more of the RN scripts to handle things like git tagging, git pushing, and NPM publishing. The intention is to leverage new features that have been added to those scripts, like the ability to build nightlies and dry runs, along with increased safety via checks on the version number. 
- Don't bother with manually removing and restoring workspace config. We don't need the `private` field set anyway since we don't have beachball auto-publishing or anything. 

> - Extract all the steps to a template `apple-job-publish` with a parameter to switch between nightlies, dry runs, and releases. This was we can now add a new "NPM Publish Dry Run" step to our PR checks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- Extract all the steps to a template `apple-job-publish` with a parameter to switch between nightlies, dry runs, and releases. This was done so that we can now add a new "NPM Publish Dry Run" step to our PR checks.
```

> We don't however, use the scripts from upstream to publish to NPM or Github, we still keep that as separate steps in Azure Pipelines. In the future, we can look into removing these steps and just using the scripts directly. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We don't however use the scripts from upstream to publish to NPM or Github: we still keep that as separate steps in Azure Pipelines. In the future, we can look into removing these steps and just using the scripts directly. 
```
